The Shape of Addition: Geometric Structures of Arithmeticin Large Language Models

 Title:

 Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:

 Description:

 arXiv is now an independent nonprofit!
 Learn more
 ×

 License: CC BY 4.0

arXiv:2606.03645v1 [cs.LG] 29 May 2026

## The Shape of Addition: Geometric Structures of Arithmetic
in Large Language Models

Liuyuan Wen

Affiliation: State Key Laboratory of Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China

Xun Zhu

Affiliation: State Key Laboratory of Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China

Lihao Huang

Affiliation: State Key Laboratory of Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China

Wenbin Li

Affiliation: State Key Laboratory of Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China

Correspondence to: liwenbin@nju.edu.cn

Yang Gao

Affiliation: State Key Laboratory of Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China

## Abstract

Large Language Models exhibit paradoxical fragility in fundamental arithmetic,
implying a disconnect between internal computation and discrete output. By analyzing
the residual stream geometry during multi-operand addition, we identify the
Iso-Raw-Sum Trajectory (IRST), a geometric structure where representations are
anchored by semantic digits and modulated by continuous carry fibers. We
propose the Noisy Quantization Model to explain this geometry, framing arithmetic
errors as Geometric Slippages caused by internal neural noise pushing a continuous,
latent Carry Potential across quantization thresholds. This geometric framework
further elucidates Probe Versatility, explaining how lightweight probes can
disentangle coexisting latent signals (such as ground truth versus hallucination)
from a single activation vector. Finally, we validate these insights through
a geometric consistency check method that effectively detects and corrects
these quantization failures during inference. Our code is available at https://github.com/RL-MIND/Shape-of-Addition.

## Keywords: 
Mechanistic Interpretability, Large Language Models, Arithmetic Reasoning, Probing, Representation Geometry, Inference-time Intervention

††affiliationnotice: †Equal contribution *Corresponding author 

## 1 Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in
complex mathematical reasoning, achieving high performance on benchmarks such as
GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021) and MATH (Hendrycks et al., 2021). However, a paradox remains:
despite their proficiency in high-level problem solving, LLMs exhibit surprising
fragility in fundamental algorithmic primitives (Li et al., 2025), particularly
multi-digit arithmetic (Nanda et al., 2023). Even sophisticated models
frequently commit “off-by-one” errors as the number of operands increases, suggesting
a fundamental disconnect between their internal computation and final discrete
output.
While prior research has attempted to model these behaviors through either
symbolic manipulation (Quirke et al., 2025) or geometric representations
(Nanda et al., 2023; Kantamneni and Tegmark, 2025), the precise mechanism linking
internal activation geometries to specific output failures remains elusive.

Crucially, recent probing studies have deepened this mystery
(Yan, 2025; Baeumel et al., 2025). Lightweight probes can now accurately
detect error signals and even decode the ground truth from the residual stream
of a failing model (Su et al., 2024; Sun et al., 2025). This implies a
critical disconnect: the model internally encodes the correct information, yet
fails to output it. While existing probes serve as effective diagnostic tools,
they identify when a model errs without explaining how
representation geometry mechanistically induces specific failures like carry
propagation errors.

Figure 1: Overview of our probing framework. (Left) The LLM
performs multi-operand addition (e.g., 123+392+136 ) in an autoregressive manner.
At each generation step (e.g., p=1 , corresponding to the tens digit), we
extract the hidden state vectors 𝒉p(l) (mainly focusing
on the final layer L ). (Right) We train versatile probes on these
activation vectors to decode several critical arithmetic variables, including
discrete states (Ground Truth, Model Output, Correctness, Input Carry, Raw
Sum) and continuous variables (Carry Potential Φ , defined in Section 5).
The ability to decode these diverse and interrelated signals from a single vector
motivates our geometric analysis of the residual stream. 

In this work, we investigate the fine-grained internal representations of LLMs
performing a challenging arithmetic task: the addition of three (or more) 10-digit
integers. Unlike previous studies that focus on the first token
(Sun et al., 2025), we analyze the residual stream activations at every generated
digit position (as shown in Figure 1).
Our probing experiments reveal a phenomenon we term probe versatility.
We find that lightweight probes (e.g., logistic regression, MLPs) can simultaneously
decode diverse signals—including the Ground Truth, Model Output, Input Carry and
so on—from a single activation vector.
The coexistence of these signals implies that the representation
space is actually a highly structured manifold. This raises a fundamental representational
question: What is the geometric structure underlying LLM arithmetic representations that allows ground truth and hallucination to coexist?

To decipher this structure, we employ UMAP (McInnes et al., 2018) as dimensionality
reduction to visualize the internal activation manifolds, primarily at the
final layer (Figure 2). We discover that representations are organized
into Iso-Raw-Sum Trajectories (IRSTs)—continuous fibers of constant raw
sum that thread through a hierarchical geometry composed of a macroscopic backbone
of digit basins and a microscopic texture of input carry states. Within this
framework, arithmetic errors are characterizable as geometric
slippages—continuous drifts along an IRST that push the representation across
the decision boundaries of adjacent digit basins due to ambiguity in carry representation.

Building on these observations, we propose the Noisy Quantization
Model, positing that LLMs estimate a continuous Carry Potential which
is subsequently discretized. This framework characterizes arithmetic failures
as noise-induced threshold crossings, accurately predicting the periodic bathtub
error distribution observed in our experiments (Figure 5). Furthermore,
this geometric perspective helps us demonstrate that the probe
versatility phenomenon is a direct function of the manifold’s topological separability
rather than mere information extractability.

Finally, we validate this framework through an inference-time self-correction
method via dual-stream consistency. By enforcing logical alignment between decoded
local (Raw Sum) and global (Carry Potential) signals, we significantly recover
performance. This confirms that the model’s internal representations retain the
correct mathematical components even when the final token selection is erroneous.

In summary, the main contributions of this work are:

• 

We identify the Iso-Raw-Sum Trajectory (IRST), revealing how LLMs
represent arithmetic states through a hierarchy of raw sum fibers and digit
basins.

• 

We propose the Noisy Quantization Model, which mechanistically
models arithmetic errors as quantization failures of a continuous Carry
Potential.

• 

We provide a geometric elucidation of probing phenomenon, showing that
probing performance hierarchy is structurally determined by the manifold’s
topology.

• 

We introduce a dual-stream consistency check method for inference-time
intervention, validating the retention of correct latent signals even in
erroneous cases.

Figure 2: 2D UMAP visualization of the arithmetic manifold. (Left)
Macroscopic Backbone: Global geometry of 𝒉p(L) (p=4 )
organized around digit Anchors (0–9). Blue points denote correct samples labeled
as s^p ; red points denote errors labeled as s^p​(sp) . The
inset highlights high-error transition zones between digit basins. (Right)
Microscopic Texture: Magnified view around Anchor 1 labeled with (sp,s^p,cp) , showing that representations within a digit basin are
further stratified into distinct fibers by the input carry state cp . (The
geometric consistency in high-dimensional space is validated in Appendix
C.) 

## 2 Preliminaries

We investigate the internal mechanisms of LLMs during multi-operand addition.
This section establishes the mathematical definitions and the probing
framework used to infer latent internal states, as illustrated in Figure 1.

## 2.1 Mathematical Framework

We consider the task of adding n integers, denoted as
A0,A1,…,An−1 . Each integer Ai consists of m decimal digits.
Let ai,k∈{0,1,…,9} denote the digit of Ai at the
10k position (where the units place corresponds to k=0 ). Therefore,
each addend can be expressed as Ai=∑k=0m−1ai,k⋅10k . Let
S be the sum of these integers, i.e., S=∑i=0n−1Ai .

We construct a dataset 𝒟 of N addition problems. The LLM generates
the sum token-by-token in an autoregressive manner from the most significant digit
to the least. We define the generation step as the position p . If
the target sum S has a length of P digits, the generation position p∈{0,…,P−1} corresponds to the mathematical significance k=P−1−p .

Crucially, the arithmetic state at any position p is governed by three
fundamental variables: the Raw Sum rp=∑i=0n−1ai,p , which is
the column-wise sum of input digits; the Input Carry cp , propagated from
the lower-order position; and the Ground Truth Digit sp . These satisfy
the modular relation sp≡(rp+cp)(mod10) .

To characterize the model’s internal state, we introduce parallel variables for
the model’s behavior. Let s^p denote the Predicted Digit generated
by the model. We further postulate two latent variables: the Predicted Raw Sum
r^p and the Predicted Input Carry c^p , representing the internal
information the model utilizes to generate s^p . We aggregate these
into a state tuple for each position:

𝒳p=(sp,s^p,cp,c^p,rp,r^p). 

(1)

This formalism allows us to distinguish between the mathematical truths (sp,cp,rp ) and the model’s internal representations (s^p,c^p,r^p ).

## 2.2 Internal Activations and Probing

For every problem in the dataset 𝒟 and at each generation position
p , we extract the internal hidden states 𝒉p(l) from
layer l (primarily focusing on the final layer L , layer-wise analysis is
provided in Appendix K). To decode the information encoded in
these representations, we train lightweight probes on 𝒉p(L) .
We target the discrete variables defined in the previous section: the ground truth
digit sp , the predicted digit s^p , the input carry cp , and
the raw sum rp . Additionally, we investigate continuous variables such as
the Carry Potential Φ , a scalar value modeling the accumulation
of arithmetic value from the context, which is defined in Section 5.

## 2.3 Latent Carry States

While sp , s^p , cp , and rp are directly observable, the
internally predicted c^p and r^p are latent and must be inferred.
We assume that the model generally performs the local addition operation
correctly (i.e., r^p≈rp ), see Appendix D
for a validation. So that errors in s^p primarily stem from
incorrect carry states. By analyzing the modular arithmetic relations, we can
map the observed output errors to internal carry deviations. Specifically, if
the model underestimates the digit by 1, it implies a leakage in the internal carry
(c^p=cp−1 ); conversely, if it overestimates by 1, it implies a
hallucinated carry (c^p=cp+1 ). A detailed derivation is provided
in Appendix E.

Figure 3: The Iso-Raw-Sum Trajectory (IRST) framework of the
arithmetic manifold. (Left) Magnified UMAP projection around digit
Anchors 1, 2, and 3. Points are labeled with (s^p,cp) . The
geometry reveals distinct IRSTs (𝒯0∼𝒯3 ) that
act as continuous “threads” piercing through adjacent digit basins. For instance,
𝒯1 (where rpmod10=1 ) connects stable nodes
(1,0)↔(2,1)↔(3,2) as the input carry
increases. (Top-Right) Abstract representation of the global
manifold, illustrating how parallel raw-sum fibers (𝒯r) organize
the representation space across all digit basins (0–9). (Bottom-Right)
Detailed state-level schematic of the IRST framework. Gray boxes represent digit
basins; states are defined by the tuple
(sp,s^p,cp,c^p) . Blue denotes correct predictions,
while red denotes geometric slippages (errors). These errors are
concentrated at transition zones between basins along an IRST, resulting from
the model’s miscalculation of the input carry (c^p=cp±1 ). 

## 3 Representational Geometry

## 3.1 Experimental Setup

To empirically investigate the latent structure of arithmetic reasoning, we
conduct experiments using the Qwen3-4B model (Yang et al., 2025), which consists
of L=36 transformer layers. We construct a dataset 𝒟 containing
N=10,000 addition problems, each involving three 10 -digit integers. In
this 3 -term addition setup, the input carry cp at any position can take
values in {0,1,2} . We focus our analysis on the hidden states
𝒉p(L) extracted from the final layer at position p=4 11
 1

 We
select p=4 as a representative middle position..
Analysis of other
interior positions yields qualitatively similar findings, while boundary positions
are discussed in Appendix G.

We visualize the high-dimensional activation space using UMAP (McInnes et al., 2018)
dimensionality reduction with cosine distance as the distance metric
(see Appendix B for other reduction methods). To provide
a semantic reference, we include the output unembedding vectors of the digit
tokens 0 through 9 in the reduction process, which serve as fixed Anchors22
 2

 These
anchors serve exclusively as auxiliary landmarks for semantic grounding; their
inclusion does not alter the intrinsic geometry of the activation vectors
in the UMAP projection. in the resulting 2D map. The visualization, presented
in Figure 2, reveals a highly organized geometric manifold that
encodes the model’s arithmetic state through a hierarchical geometric
structure. More detailed experimental settings are provided in Appendix A.

## 3.2 Geometric Structure

The geometry of the last-layer activations exhibits a clear separation between
global semantic identity and local arithmetic state. We characterize this structure
as having a macroscopic backbone modulated by a microscopic texture.
The macroscopic backbone is dominated by the identity of the output tokens. As
seen in the left panel of Figure 2, the activation vectors are
strongly clustered into ten distinct basins, each centered around a specific digit
anchor. This indicates that the primary organization of the residual stream at
the final layer is determined by the categorical selection of the next token.

Within each digit basin, the representation space possesses a fine-grained microscopic
texture. As illustrated in the magnified view around Anchor 1 in the right
panel of Figure 2, the data points are not distributed uniformly.
Instead, they are stratified into parallel sub-manifolds or fibers
determined by the ground truth input carry cp . Specifically, for any
digit basin, we observe three distinct clusters corresponding to the states cp∈{0,1,2} . This suggests that the model internalizes the underlying
algebraic structure (Chang et al., 2024) to distinguish the source of a
digit. For instance, differentiating “a 3 derived from no carry” from “a 3
derived from a carry of 1”.

The distribution of correct (blue) and incorrect (red) samples further
elucidates the reliability of this manifold in Figure 2. Correct predictions
cluster densely at the center of these carry-specific fibers, representing
stable states of computation. Conversely, errors predominantly occur in the
sparse transition zones between digit basins or between carry fibers. As shown
in the inset of the left panel, incorrect samples often lie on the fringes of
their ground truth digit basins, physically drifting toward adjacent anchors.
This drift manifests empirically as the prevalent “off-by-one” errors—a
common failure mode cataloged in mathematical reasoning benchmarks
(Zhang and Graf, 2025), confirming that geometric adjacency on the manifold
aligns with numerical adjacency.
This spatial distribution suggests that arithmetic failures are essentially
geometric instabilities, where the internal representation fails to
align with the correct geometric trajectory.

## 4 Geometric Analysis of Internal States

Building on the UMAP visualization of the last-layer activations, we propose a
geometric framework called the Iso-Raw-Sum Trajectory (IRST) to
interpret how the LLM encodes arithmetic states (Figure 3).

## 4.1 Iso-Raw-Sum Trajectories (IRST)

The key insight connecting the discrete digit clusters is the conservation of the
raw sum rp . We define an IRST, denoted as 𝒯r ,
as a continuous manifold connecting all internal states that share the same
raw sum rp=r . Recalling the identity s^p=(rp+c^p)(mod10) , a trajectory 𝒯r does not stay within a single digit
basin but traverses across adjacent basins as the carry c^p varies.

As illustrated in Figure 3 (Left), consider the trajectory 𝒯1 (where raw sum rp=1 ). It acts as a continuous thread that pierces
through the boundaries of Anchors 1, 2, and 3, connecting three stable fixed
nodes in a linear sequence:

𝒯1:(1,1,0,0)⏟Anchor 1, ​c=0↔(2,2,1,1)⏟Anchor 2, ​c=1↔(3,3,2,2)⏟Anchor 3, ​c=2. 

(2)

Here, we use the tuple notation (sp,s^p,cp,c^p) . The
model transitions between output digits s and s+1 by sliding along these fixed
raw sum fibers, driven by the shift in the internal carry state.

## 4.2 Geometric Slippage on Trajectories

In this framework, arithmetic errors are not random noise but specific Geometric
Slippages along an IRST. They occur when activation vectors drift onto
unstable segments connecting stable nodes, rather than aligning with the stable
nodes themselves.

Focusing on the transition between Anchor 1 and Anchor 2 (see
Figure 3, Bottom-Right), we identify two distinct error paths corresponding
to different raw sums:

## Scenario 1: Slippage on 𝒯1 (Raw Sum = 1).

This trajectory bridges the stable node (1,1,0,0) and (2,2,1,1) . Errors found
on the segment connecting these nodes represent a specific confusion between carry
0 and carry 1. In the case of Overestimation (Hallucination), characterized
by state (1,2,0,1) , the ground truth requires c=0 , but the model hallucinates
c^=1 , geometrically pushing the representation from Anchor 1 toward
Anchor 2. Conversely, Underestimation (Leakage) corresponds to state
(2,1,1,0) ; here, the ground truth involves c=1 , but the model misses the carry
(c^=0 ), causing the vector to slide back from the correct basin of
Anchor 2 into Anchor 1.

## Scenario 2: Slippage on 𝒯0 (Raw Sum = 0).

Similarly, 𝒯0 bridges (1,1,1,1) and (2,2,2,2) , involving
confusion between carry 1 and 2. Here, hallucination manifests as (1,2,1,2) ,
where the model erroneously jumps to c^=2 despite c=1 . Leakage appears
as (2,1,2,1) , where the model fails to sustain the carry, retreating to the lower
state c^=1 .

The geometric nature of arithmetic errors is therefore defined by the proximity
to the decision boundary between anchors along a specific IRST. Correct
predictions cluster densely around the stable nodes, while errors are distributed
along the sparse connecting paths. In these transitional regions, the unembedding
layer struggles to distinguish between the two digits, as the activation
contains mixed signals: the raw sum suggests continuity, but the ambiguous
carry state places the vector in a “no-man’s-land” between two semantic
truths.

Figure 4: Geometric unfolding of the IRST by Carry Potential.
Visualization of the trajectory 𝒯1 , where each point is labeled
with the tuple (s^p,Φp) . (Insets) The geometry correlates
strongly with the continuous value of the theoretical carry potential Φp .
The left inset highlights the region where Φp<1 (approaching the threshold
from below), corresponding to the stable node of cp=0 . The right inset
displays the region where Φp>2 , corresponding to the node of cp=2 . The smooth spatial progression of Φp values along the manifold
confirms that the IRST is physically organized by the continuous thrust
to carry, validating the continuity assumption of the Noisy Quantization
Model. 

## 5 Formal Modeling of Carry Dynamics

Our geometric analysis reveals that the IRSTs act as continuous manifolds
connecting discrete digit anchors. This continuity suggests that the LLM’s internal
representation of arithmetic is not purely symbolic. Instead, we hypothesize that
the model maintains a continuous, latent variable representing the “pressure”
to carry, which is subsequently discretized. In this section, we verify this hypothesis
by proposing the Noisy Quantization Model. We demonstrate that arithmetic
errors are essentially predictable consequences of signal detection noise near
quantization boundaries.

## 5.1 Carry Potential (Φ )

We define the Carry Potential, denoted
as Φp∈ℝ≥0 , as the theoretical accumulation of
numerical value flowing from lower-order positions (the right context) into
the current position p . Unlike the discrete ground truth carry cp∈ℤ ,
the potential Φp is a continuous scalar derived from the weighted sum
of raw sums in the context:

Φp=∑j=1P−1−prp+j10j, 

(3)

where rp+j is the raw sum of the digits at relative position j to the right
of p . Physically, Φp represents the thrust or momentum
of the carry signal, and the discrete ground truth carry corresponds to its
integer floor: cp=⌊Φp⌋ . For example, as illustrated in
Figure 1, the rightward context yields a potential of
Φ=1.4+0.11=1.51 . This continuous value physically represents the thrust
to carry, which is subsequently quantized to the discrete carry cp=⌊1.51⌋=1 .

This theoretical definition is strongly corroborated by our empirical observations.
As shown in Figure 4, when we label the activation manifold with
the calculated values of Φp , we observe a smooth spatial gradient
along the IRST. The representation explicitly encodes the continuous magnitude
of Φp , placing states with Φp≈0.9 (high risk of carry)
spatially closer to the next carry basin than states with
Φp≈0.1 .

## 5.2 Noisy Quantization Hypothesis

We posit that the LLM estimates this external potential Φp via its
internal representations. We further hypothesize that, due in part to the dilution
of attention over long contexts and the limited precision of superposition,
this estimation is corrupted by neural noise. We model the Perceived
Carry Potential,
Φ^p , as:

Φ^p=Φp+ϵ,ϵ∼𝒩⁡(0,σ2), 

(4)

where ϵ represents additive Gaussian noise with zero mean and
variance σ2 . The parameter σ , which we term the Cognitive
Noise Level, encapsulates the effective uncertainty in the model’s estimation
imposed by the current task complexity. The model then generates the discrete predicted
input carry c^p by performing a quantization operation (flooring) on
this noisy signal:

c^p=⌊Φ^p⌋=⌊Φp+ϵ⌋. 

(5)

Errors occur when the noise ϵ is sufficient to push the perceived
potential Φ^p across an integer quantization boundary.

Figure 5: Empirical validation of the Noisy Quantization Model.
(Top) The distribution of Carry Potential Φ across all generated
positions p in the dataset. Green vertical lines indicate integer
quantization thresholds (1.0,2.0,… ). (Bottom) The
conditional error rate as a function of Φ . The empirical data (red bars,
off-by-one errors only) exhibits a distinct periodic bathtub shape,
spiking near integer boundaries (intervals with low sample density are omitted).
The theoretical error curve (dashed blue line), derived from
Equation 6, fits the data with high fidelity (R2=0.80 ),
estimating the model’s internal noise level at σ≈0.05 . 

## 5.3 Bathtub Error Rate

This formulation constitutes a threshold detection problem. The likelihood of
an error depends on the distance of the potential Φp to the nearest
integer boundary.

Let δ⁡(Φ)=Φ(mod1) be the fractional part of the potential, the
total probability of an off-by-one carry error given a potential Φ is the
sum of the probabilities of Underestimation (Leakage) and Overestimation
(Hallucination):

P⁡(Error∣Φ)=Q⁡(δ⁡(Φ)σ)⏟Leakage Risk+Q⁡(1−δ⁡(Φ)σ)⏟Hallucination Risk, 

(6)

where Q⁡(⋅) is the standard Q-function. Detailed derivation provided in Appendix
F. This equation predicts a periodic bathtub
error distribution: error rates spike when Φ is close to an integer i (metastability)
and vanish when Φ is near i+0.5 (robust plateaus).

To empirically validate this prediction, we computed the analytical carry potential
Φ across the entire dataset 𝒟 . Both the global distribution
of potentials (Figure 5, Top) and the conditional error rate (Figure 5,
Bottom) reveals a striking periodic bathtub pattern. Error rates
spike drastically near integer boundaries (e.g., Φ≈1.0,2.0 ), identifying
them as regions of metastability where the signal is most ambiguous. Conversely,
the error rates reach their minima at half-integer values (e.g., Φ≈1.5 ). These robust plateaus represent the states where the signal is
maximally distinct from the quantization thresholds.

By fitting the theoretical curve to this empirical distribution, we extract a noise
parameter of σ≈0.05 . This value quantifies the model’s
processing uncertainty, reflecting the precision limit of internal signal processing
specific to this computational context. The close alignment between theory and
observation confirms that arithmetic errors are mechanistically determined by
this internal noise pushing the carry potential across quantization boundaries.
More investigation into how this noise scales with task complexity is provided
in Appendix G.

Table 1: Probing accuracy on the final layer activations (p=4 ). Datasets are
individually balanced for each probe target.

Target Variable
Symbol
Acc

Ground Truth
sp 
94.85%

Model Output
s^p 
98.81%

Correctness
𝕀⁡(s^p≠sp) 
82.41%

Raw Sum (Mod 10)
rp(mod10) 
98.60%

Input Carry
cp 
96.84%

Carry Potential
Φp 
92.08%(floored)

## 6 Trajectory-Level Validation and Causal Steering

The IRST geometry illustrated in Figures 3 and 4
predicts more than a visually plausible 2D embedding: along any IRST,
arithmetic states should be ordered by a continuous carry coordinate, and
moving a representation along that coordinate should causally change the
generated digit. To test this directly, we define a
trajectory-local steering direction between two adjacent stable centroids
𝝁a and 𝝁b on the same IRST:

v→s​t​e​e​r=𝝁b−𝝁a‖𝝁b−𝝁a‖. 

(7)

We then intervene on a final-layer pre-norm activation 𝒉 by

𝒉~​(α)=𝒉+α⋅v→s​t​e​e​r, 

(8)

where α>0 moves the state toward the higher-carry basin and
α<0 suppresses the carry signal. If the carry potential is genuinely
represented along this direction, samples near a quantization boundary should flip under smaller
perturbations than deep in-basin states.

We evaluate this prediction on a representative trajectory 𝒯3 at
p=4 , where the adjacent stable states (3,3,0) , (4,4,1) , and (5,5,2) 
are all well populated. For this case, we instantiate the steering vector using
𝝁a=𝝁(4,4,1) and
𝝁b=𝝁(5,5,2) . In Figure 6
(Left), plotting the analytical Carry Potential Φ against the cosine
distance to 𝝁(4,4,1) yields the predicted V-shaped
progression, with off-by-one errors such as (4,5,1) and (5,4,2) concentrated
in the transition regions rather than forming a separate cluster. In
Figure 6 (Right), the boundary-adjacent states (4,5,1) and
(5,4,2) switch at substantially smaller perturbation magnitudes
(α≈−0.1 and α≈0.3 , respectively) than the stable
states (5,5,2) and (4,4,1) 
(α≈−0.5 and α≈0.5 ). This separation of critical
thresholds supports the claim that the model’s arithmetic decision is governed
by a carry-like continuous direction. Additional
analysis are deferred to
Appendix C.

Figure 6: Representative trajectory-level validation on 𝒯3 .
The markers are labeled as (sp,s^p,cp) . Circles denote
correct predictions and squares denote errors. (Left) Empirical
projection of last-layer activations for samples in 𝒯3 . The
x-axis shows the cosine distance from the central centroid (4,4,1) . The
manifold exhibits a clear V-shaped progression connecting stable basins.
Crucially, error states such as (4,3,1) and (5,4,2) cluster in the
transition regions between stable fibers, validating the geometric
slippage hypothesis. (Right) Causal steering results. We inject
the carry vector v→s​t​e​e​r (derived from contrastive means) and
measure the Logit Shift (Logit​(5)−Logit​(4) ). The results show
characteristic sigmoid phase transitions: stable states require larger
|α| to flip than metastable error states near the boundary.

## 7 Geometric Origins of Probing Phenomenon

Our discovery offers a unified geometric lens to interpret the varying performance
of linear probes reported in literature. We trained same logistic regression
probes on a same balanced datasets at p=4 . As shown in Table 1,
the accuracy differences are essentially direct measures of the geometric
separability of the underlying manifold.

## Model Output vs. Ground Truth.

The probe for Model Output achieves near-perfect accuracy (98.81%), effectively
mimicking the unembedding matrix to identify the Voronoi basin of the predicted
anchor. In contrast, the Ground Truth probe lags significantly (94.85%). This
gap confirms our geometric slippage hypothesis: Activation vectors physically
drift to incorrect basins during errors. For the probe to recover the ground
truth in these cases, it would need to map the incorrect basin back to the correct
label, which contradicts the local geometry.

## Correctness as Boundary Detection.

The Correctness probe yields the lowest accuracy (82.41%). Geometrically,
this probe acts as a stability detector, attempting to distinguish samples deep
within a basin (correct) from those in the transition zones (likely errors).
The moderate performance implies that the manifold is continuous; there is no sharp
error flag or discrete boundary separating correct and incorrect states, only
a smooth gradient of ambiguity along the IRST.

## Decoding the IRST Structure.

The high accuracy of the Raw Sum probe (98.60%) supports the existence of
distinct IRSTs. Since most arithmetic errors are off-by-one carry shifts, the
representation slides along the same IRST rather than jumping to a different
one, preserving the linear separability of the raw sum. Similarly, the Input Carry
probe (96.84%) successfully disentangles the parallel fibers (carry 0, 1, 2)
within these trajectories.

## Continuous Potential vs. Discrete Carry.

The Carry Potential probe, trained via regression, achieves 92.08% accuracy (after
quantization). This slightly lower performance compared to the discrete carry probe
reflects the complexity of mapping the continuous position along an IRST to a discrete
integer. The probe is essentially measuring the distance traveled along the
trajectory; the fact that it correlates highly with the discrete carry validates
that the IRST is physically organized by this continuous magnitude.

## 8 Inference-Time Self-Correction

Building on the Noisy Quantization model, we propose a geometric inference-time
intervention acting as a causal probe to validate the IRST structure. By
mitigating quantization noise through logical consistency constraints, we show
that the underlying arithmetic signal remains intact and recoverable.

## 8.1 Dual-Stream Consistency Protocol

We interpret the activation vector 𝒉p(L) at the final
layer through two orthogonal lightweight probes. First, we decode the Local
Calculation Stream using a classification probe fθr to obtain the predicted
raw sum digit r^p . Second, we decode the Global Context
Stream using a regression probe fθϕ to estimate the
continuous carry potential Φ^p . As demonstrated in Section 5,
Φ^p acts as a proxy for the cumulative context information, while
r^p represents the immediate column-wise arithmetic.

In a consistent arithmetic system, the generated token s^p must
satisfy the modular identity s^p≡(r^p+c)(mod10) 
for some valid carry c . However, due to the inherent cognitive noise
σ in estimating Φ^p , enforcing a strict integer carry c=⌊Φ^p⌋ is prone to false positives near quantization boundaries.
To address this, we introduce a robust consistency check. We define a set of
Plausible Carries 𝒦p​(δ) derived from the δ -neighborhood
of the estimated potential:

𝒦p​(δ)={⌊ϕ⌋∣ϕ∈[Φ^p−δ,Φ^p+δ]}. 

(9)

The generation s^p is deemed consistent if it can be explained by
the local raw sum r^p and any plausible carry
c∈𝒦p​(δ) .

If the model’s output s^p fails this consistency check, it indicates
a geometric divergence where the representation has drifted off the valid IRST.
In such cases, we intervene by overriding the output logits: s^n​e​w=(r^p+⌊Φ^p⌋)(mod10) . This effectively
projects the divergent state back onto the correct manifold fiber.

Table 2: Performance comparison of different correction methods on Token-level
Accuracy, True Positive Correction, and False Positive Preservation.

Method
Token Acc
TP Corr
FP Pres

Original
86.26%
/
/

Re-Prompting
79.90%
0.08%
99.98%

Steering
88.27%
30.58%
96.97%

Replacement
89.13%
31.73%
97.65%

Ours(δ=0 )
87.27%
44.39%
94.07%

Ours (δ=0.1 )
89.56%
30.46%
98.13%

## 8.2 Experimental Results

We evaluate our method against baselines, including re-prompting (Sun et al., 2025),
linear steering (Bhalla et al., 2024) and hard replacement (using a Ground Truth
probe).
As shown in Table 2, our method (δ=0.1 ) achieves
the highest accuracy (89.56% ). Crucially, these results serve as a causal
validation of the IRST geometry rather than a mere performance boost. The ability
to correct errors using only internal consistency confirms that the model retains
correct latent information despite erroneous output quantization.

Moreover, the sensitivity to δ corroborates the Noisy Quantization
Model. While δ=0 yields the highest correction rate (TP Corr: 44.39%),
it aggressively overwrites valid ambiguous states. The balanced performance at
δ=0.1 mirrors the theoretical “bathtub” stability, confirming that
the representation space is indeed structured by a continuous potential
subject to stochastic boundary noise. Full tolerance ablations and additional
implementation details are deferred to Appendix J.

Table 3: Ablation study disentangling raw-sum and carry information for the
dual-stream correction mechanism (δ=0 , Qwen3-4B, 3-term addition).

Method
Token Acc
TP Corr
FP Pres

R+C
86.7%
42.3%
93.9%

R+TC
96.0%
69.3%
99.0%

TR+C
90.5%
65.4%
94.6%

R+C denotes Raw-Sum
Probe + Carry Probe, R+TC denotes Raw-Sum Probe + True Carry,
and TR+C denotes True Raw-Sum + Carry Probe.

We further conduct an ablation study to decouple the geometric components used
by the dual-stream protocol. As shown in Table 3,
R+TC reaches 96.0% token accuracy, indicating that the model’s latent
local computation remains highly robust even when the final output token is
wrong. In contrast, TR+C only reaches 90.5% token accuracy,
mechanically isolating the noisy carry potential as the main bottleneck behind
arithmetic failures.

## 9 Related Works

## 9.1 LLM Arithmetic and Probing

While LLMs demonstrate impressive arithmetic capabilities (Cobbe et al., 2021; Hendrycks et al., 2021; Yuan et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024),
the underlying mechanisms remain debated. One paradigm views arithmetic as discrete
symbolic manipulation, where inputs are mapped to categorical sum types (Quirke and Barez, 2024)
or rely on optimized tokenization schemes (Singh and Strouse, 2024) to
execute algorithmic logic. Conversely, heuristic analyses identify specific
bottlenecks in this process, such as the narrow “lookahead” window for carry
propagation (Baeumel et al., 2025) and the fragility of multi-digit
attention (Qiu et al., 2024). To bridge these views, recent probing studies
have successfully mapped the layer-wise evolution of arithmetic signals (Yan, 2025; Zhu et al., 2025)
and utilized lightweight classifiers to detect error states or decode ground
truth from residual streams (Sun et al., 2025; Hedström et al., 2025). However, these
approaches predominantly treat internal states as discrete variables. Our work
challenges this assumption by reinterpreting arithmetic generation as the
noisy quantization of a Continuous Carry Potential, providing a
mechanistic explanation for why linear probes can successfully disentangle
these signals.

## 9.2 Geometry of Reasoning

Broader studies on Riemannian geometry and topological persistence offer a foundational
backdrop (Shao et al., 2018; Naitzat et al., 2020; Fitz et al., 2024; Azizian et al., 2025; Tiblias et al., 2026),
yet deciphering arithmetic requires analyzing specific algebraic structures.
Nanda et al. (2023) hypothesized that models perform modular arithmetic via
rotational dynamics on circular manifolds. Recent refinements suggest LLMs
utilize high-dimensional spirals or trigonometric encodings (Kantamneni and Tegmark, 2025),
often composing digit-wise circular representations with linear magnitude
components (Levy and Geva, 2025; Engels et al., 2026). However, abstract topologies rarely
map directly to concrete failure modes. Our framework refines these helical
hypotheses by revealing a locally stratified manifold where the proximity of
carry fibers determines error probabilities via mechanistic geometric
slippages.

## 10 Conclusion and Discussion

This work identifies the IRST as the geometric backbone of arithmetic,
where errors manifest as mechanistic geometric slippages. Our Noisy Quantization Model formalizes this process,
showing that models often maintain a correct continuous Carry
Potential internally but fail during discrete token selection due to neural noise
near quantization boundaries. Empirically, we observe that error distributions
are predominantly off-by-one (±1 shifts). Our geometric framework provides a structural explanation: unlike
a circular clock-face representation, Anchors 0 and 9 are geometrically
distant along the backbone. This helical geometry imposes a high energetic barrier
against wrap-around and non-unit errors, effectively restricting failure modes
to local shifts along a continuous IRST fiber.

Our methodology leverages the single-digit tokenization of models (e.g., Qwen3
(Yang et al., 2025), Gemma3 (Team et al., 2025)), which allows for a direct
alignment between visual digits and internal arithmetic states without the
interference of multi-digit grouping. While we hypothesize that BPE-based models
rely on similar latent geometries, their carry signals are likely entangled
within dense multi-digit embeddings, presenting a frontier for future research.
At the same time, our current evidence still combines UMAP visualization and probe-based decoding rather than a full circuit-level
localization of the arithmetic computation, and our empirical focus remains mainly on addition. Even so, the
success of our dual-stream consistency check confirms that hallucinations are
often quantization failures of a correct continuous potential, suggesting that
improving LLM reliability depends on stabilizing the mapping from these
continuous neural thoughts to discrete symbolic outputs.

## Acknowledgement

This work is supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (62576160), Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (KG202508), 111 Center (B26023), and Fundamental and Interdisciplinary Disciplines Breakthrough Plan of the Ministry of Education of China (JYB2025XDXM118).

## Impact Statement

This paper presents work whose goal is to advance the field of Machine Learning.
There are many potential societal consequences of our work, none which we feel
must be specifically highlighted here.

## References

Abdi and Williams (2010)
H. Abdi and L. J. Williams

Principal component analysis.

Wiley interdisciplinary reviews: computational statistics 2 (4), pp. 433–459.

Cited by: Appendix B.

Azizian et al. (2025)
W. Azizian, M. Kirchhof, E. Ndiaye, L. Béthune, M. Klein, P. Ablin, et al.

The geometries of truth are orthogonal across tasks.

In ICML 2025 Workshop on Reliable and Responsible Foundation Models,

Cited by: §9.2.

Baeumel et al. (2025)
T. Baeumel, J. van Genabith, and S. Ostermann

The lookahead limitation: why multi-operand addition is hard for llms.

arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.19981.

Cited by: §1,
§9.1.

Bhalla et al. (2024)
U. Bhalla, S. Srinivas, A. Ghandeharioun, and H. Lakkaraju

Towards unifying interpretability and control: evaluation via intervention.

arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.04430.

Cited by: §J.1,
§8.2.

Chang et al. (2024)
F. Chang, Y. Lin, and P. Wu

Unraveling arithmetic in large language models: the role of algebraic structures.

arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.16260.

Cited by: §3.2.

Cheng et al. (2024)
E. Cheng, M. Baroni, and C. A. Alonso

Linearly controlled language generation with performative guarantees.

In MINT: Foundation Model Interventions,

Cited by: §J.1.

Cobbe et al. (2021)
K. Cobbe, V. Kosaraju, M. Bavarian, M. Chen, H. Jun, L. Kaiser, M. Plappert, J. Tworek, J. Hilton, R. Nakano, et al.

Training verifiers to solve math word problems.

arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168.

Cited by: §1,
§9.1.

Engels et al. (2026)
J. Engels, E. J. Michaud, I. Liao, W. Gurnee, and M. Tegmark

Not all language model features are one-dimensionally linear.

In Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),

Cited by: §9.2.

Fitz et al. (2024)
S. Fitz, P. Romero, and J. J. Schneider

Hidden holes-topological aspects of language models.

In NeurIPS 2024 Workshop on Symmetry and Geometry in Neural Representations,

Cited by: §9.2.

Hedström et al. (2025)
A. Hedström, S. I. Amoukou, T. Bewley, S. Mishra, and M. Veloso

To steer or not to steer? mechanistic error reduction with abstention for language models.

In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning,

Cited by: §9.1.

Hendrycks et al. (2021)
D. Hendrycks, C. Burns, S. Kadavath, A. Arora, S. Basart, E. Tang, D. Song, and J. Steinhardt

Measuring mathematical problem solving with the math dataset.

In Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Round 2),

Cited by: §1,
§9.1.

Kantamneni and Tegmark (2025)
S. Kantamneni and M. Tegmark

Language models use trigonometry to do addition.

In ICLR 2025 Workshop on Building Trust in Language Models and Applications,

Cited by: §1,
§9.2.

Levy and Geva (2025)
A. A. Levy and M. Geva

Language models encode numbers using digit representations in base 10.

In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 2: Short Papers),

pp. 385–395.

Cited by: §9.2.

Li et al. (2025)
H. Li, X. Chen, Z. Xu, D. Li, N. Hu, F. Teng, Y. Li, L. Qiu, C. J. Zhang, L. Qing, et al.

Exposing numeracy gaps: a benchmark to evaluate fundamental numerical abilities in large language models.

In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025,

pp. 20004–20026.

Cited by: §1.

Li et al. (2023)
K. Li, O. Patel, F. Viégas, H. Pfister, and M. Wattenberg

Inference-time intervention: eliciting truthful answers from a language model.

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36, pp. 41451–41530.

Cited by: §J.1.

Maaten and Hinton (2008)
L. v. d. Maaten and G. Hinton

Visualizing data using t-sne.

Journal of machine learning research 9 (Nov), pp. 2579–2605.

Cited by: Appendix B.

Mallen et al. (2024)
A. T. Mallen, M. Brumley, J. Kharchenko, and N. Belrose

Eliciting latent knowledge from ”quirky” language models.

In First Conference on Language Modeling,

Cited by: §J.1.

McInnes et al. (2018)
L. McInnes, J. Healy, and J. Melville

Umap: uniform manifold approximation and projection for dimension reduction.

arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.03426.

Cited by: §A.4,
§1,
§3.1.

Naitzat et al. (2020)
G. Naitzat, A. Zhitnikov, and L. Lim

Topology of deep neural networks.

Journal of Machine Learning Research 21 (184), pp. 1–40.

Cited by: §9.2.

Nanda et al. (2023)
N. Nanda, L. Chan, T. Lieberum, J. Smith, and J. Steinhardt

Progress measures for grokking via mechanistic interpretability.

In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,

Cited by: §1,
§9.2.

nostalgebraist (2020)
nostalgebraist

Interpreting GPT: the logit lens.

AI Alignment Forum.

External Links: Link

Cited by: Appendix L.

Paszke et al. (2019)
A. Paszke, S. Gross, F. Massa, A. Lerer, J. Bradbury, G. Chanan, T. Killeen, Z. Lin, N. Gimelshein, L. Antiga, et al.

Pytorch: an imperative style, high-performance deep learning library.

Advances in neural information processing systems 32.

Cited by: §J.1.

Pedregosa et al. (2011)
F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, et al.

Scikit-learn: machine learning in python.

the Journal of machine Learning research 12, pp. 2825–2830.

Cited by: §B.1.

Qiu et al. (2024)
L. Qiu, J. Li, C. Su, C. J. Zhang, and L. Chen

Dissecting multiplication in transformers: insights into llms.

arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.15360.

Cited by: §9.1.

Quirke and Barez (2024)
P. Quirke and F. Barez

Understanding addition in transformers.

In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations,

Cited by: §9.1.

Quirke et al. (2025)
P. Quirke, C. Neo, and F. Barez

Understanding addition and subtraction in transformers.

arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.02619v10.

Cited by: Figure 16,
Figure 16,
§H.1,
§1.

Shao et al. (2018)
H. Shao, A. Kumar, and P. Thomas Fletcher

The riemannian geometry of deep generative models.

In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops,

pp. 315–323.

Cited by: §9.2.

Singh and Strouse (2024)
A. K. Singh and D. Strouse

Tokenization counts: the impact of tokenization on arithmetic in frontier llms.

arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.14903.

Cited by: §9.1.

Su et al. (2024)
W. Su, C. Wang, Q. Ai, Y. Hu, Z. Wu, Y. Zhou, and Y. Liu

Unsupervised real-time hallucination detection based on the internal states of large language models.

In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics ACL 2024,

pp. 14379–14391.

Cited by: §1.

Sun et al. (2025)
Y. Sun, A. Stolfo, and M. Sachan

Probing for arithmetic errors in language models.

In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,

pp. 8122–8139.

Cited by: §J.1,
§J.1,
§1,
§1,
§8.2,
§9.1.

Taufeeque et al. (2024)
M. Taufeeque, P. Quirke, M. Li, C. Cundy, A. D. Tucker, A. Gleave, and A. Garriga-Alonso

Planning in a recurrent neural network that plays sokoban.

arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.15421.

Cited by: §J.1.

Team et al. (2025)
G. Team, A. Kamath, J. Ferret, S. Pathak, N. Vieillard, R. Merhej, S. Perrin, T. Matejovicova, A. Ramé, M. Rivière, et al.

Gemma 3 technical report.

arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.19786.

Cited by: §10.

Tiblias et al. (2026)
F. Tiblias, I. Bigoulaeva, J. Niu, S. Balloccu, and I. Gurevych

Hypothesis-driven feature manifold analysis in LLMs via supervised multi-dimensional scaling.

Transactions on Machine Learning Research.

Cited by: §9.2.

von Rütte et al. (2024)
D. von Rütte, S. Anagnostidis, G. Bachmann, and T. Hofmann

A language model’s guide through latent space.

In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning,

Cited by: §J.1.

Wolf et al. (2020)
T. Wolf, L. Debut, V. Sanh, J. Chaumond, C. Delangue, A. Moi, P. Cistac, T. Rault, R. Louf, M. Funtowicz, et al.

Transformers: state-of-the-art natural language processing.

In Proceedings of the 2020 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing: system demonstrations,

pp. 38–45.

Cited by: §J.1.

Yan (2025)
Y. Yan

Addition in four movements: mapping layer-wise information trajectories in llms.

arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.07824.

Cited by: §1,
§9.1.

Yang et al. (2025)
A. Yang, A. Li, B. Yang, B. Zhang, B. Hui, B. Zheng, B. Yu, C. Gao, C. Huang, C. Lv, et al.

Qwen3 technical report.

arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388.

Cited by: §A.1,
§10,
§3.1.

Yuan et al. (2023)
Z. Yuan, H. Yuan, C. Tan, W. Wang, and S. Huang

How well do large language models perform in arithmetic tasks?.

arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.02015.

Cited by: §9.1.

Zhang and Graf (2025)
L. Zhang and E. Graf

Mathematical computation and reasoning errors by large language models.

In Proceedings of the Artificial Intelligence in Measurement and Education Conference (AIME-Con): Full Papers,

pp. 417–424.

Cited by: §3.2.

Zhang et al. (2024)
W. Zhang, C. Wan, Y. Zhang, Y. Cheung, X. Tian, X. Shen, and J. Ye

Interpreting and improving large language models in arithmetic calculation.

In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning,

pp. 59932–59950.

Cited by: §9.1.

Zhu et al. (2025)
F. Zhu, D. Dai, and Z. Sui

Language models encode the value of numbers linearly.

In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Computational Linguistics,

pp. 693–709.

Cited by: §9.1.

## Appendix A Experimental Details for Section 3

## A.1 Model Configuration and Inference

We perform all experiments in the main text using the Qwen3-4B model (Yang et al., 2025).
All generations are performed using greedy decoding (temperature T=0 ) to
eliminate stochasticity and ensure that the internal representations reflect
the model’s deterministic arithmetic reasoning path.

## A.2 Dataset Construction

Our dataset 𝒟 consists of N=10,000 
distinct samples of 3-term addition problems (A0+A1+A2=S ), where
each addend is a 10-digit integer.

Prompt Template. To enforce deterministic arithmetic output and
suppress conversational filler, we employ a forced-prefix strategy. We
apply the model’s standard chat template to the instruction, and then
explicitly append the arithmetic expression and an equals sign as the start of
the assistant’s response. An example from our dataset is shown below:

Prompt and Generation Example (Real
Sample)

[User Control Tokens] 
Calculate 651507672825 + 369229089834 + 294552136401. Only output a
number. Don’t output commas. 

[Assistant Control Tokens] 
651507672825 + 369229089834 + 294552136401 = 1315289000060

In this example, the ground truth sum is 1315288899060.

Truncated Generation Protocol. To isolate the precise origin of
arithmetic errors, we employ an early stopping strategy. As shown in the
example above, the model correctly generates the prefix 131528 but deviates
at the next position (generating 9 instead of 8). We
terminate generation immediately at this first error. This ensures that every analyzed
activation 𝒉p(L) is conditioned on a strictly correct history,
confirming that the observed geometric slippage is a spontaneous divergence
from the correct manifold rather than a downstream effect of error propagation.

Data Balancing. Since random 10-digit addition yields imbalanced carry
distributions, we employ stratified sampling to ensure the manifold at p=4 
is fully populated. We enforce a uniform distribution of cp∈{0,1,2} 
at this target position to prevent visualization bias. Crucially, this intervention
is strictly local; the natural carry distribution is preserved across all
other positions, ensuring the dataset as a whole retains its global statistical
representativeness.

## A.3 Activation Extraction

Tokenization Alignment. We verify that the Qwen3 tokenizer treats
each decimal digit as a single token in our prompt format. This one-to-one mapping
between mathematical digits and semantic tokens is crucial for position-wise analysis.

Position Indexing. Consistent with our mathematical framework, the generation
index p∈{0,…,P−1} proceeds from the most significant digit (p=0 )
to the least. Consequently, our primary analysis target p=4 corresponds to the
5th generated token (mathematical significance k=P−5 ). We extract the
residual stream activation 𝒉p(L) from the final layer
L=36 , taken after the final normalization layer and immediately prior to the
unembedding projection.

## A.4 Dimensionality Reduction Settings

We employ UMAP (McInnes et al., 2018) to project the
2560-dimensional activation vectors into 2D. We utilize the cosine distance metric to capture angular semantic relationships. To preserve the global
topological structure while maintaining local separation, we set the hyperparameters
to n_neighbors=300 and min_dist=0.3. For visual clarity in
the presented figures, we apply random downsampling to the projection to mitigate
overplotting in high-density regions.

## Appendix B Comparison of Different Dimensionality Reductions

We performed a robustness check using Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
(Abdi and Williams, 2010) and t-Distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (t-SNE)
(Maaten and Hinton, 2008) as comparisons. We used the identical dataset of
final-layer hidden states (𝒉p(L) at position p=4 ) as presented
in Section 3.

## B.1 Quantitative Evaluation

We quantitatively assess the quality of the low-dimensional embeddings using
the trustworthiness metric (Pedregosa et al., 2011) with n_neighbors=50.
This metric evaluates how well the local neighborhood structure of the high-dimensional
space is preserved in the 2D projection. As shown in Table 4,
both non-linear methods (UMAP and t-SNE) achieve near-perfect scores, significantly
outperforming the linear PCA projection.

Table 4: Trustworthiness scores for different dimensionality reduction
methods on 𝒉p(L) at p=4 .

Method
Trustworthiness (↑ )

PCA (Linear)
0.8633

t-SNE (Non-linear)
0.9907

UMAP (Non-linear, Main Text)
0.9953

## B.2 Analysis of Visualizations

Figure 7 presents the visualizations for PCA and t-SNE.

Figure 7: Alternative Dimensionality Reduction Visualizations..
(Left) PCA Projection: Only macroscopic digit clustering is visible;
the fine-grained IRST fibers are collapsed due to the low variance captured
by the first two components (9.76% and 8.22%). (Right) t-SNE
Projection: The visualization clearly recovers the same structural
hierarchy (Macroscopic Backbone and Microscopic Texture) as UMAP, confirming
that the IRST is not an artifact of a specific algorithm.

Linear vs. Non-linear: The failure of PCA to reveal the backbone and texture
structure is indicative of the non-linearity of the arithmetic manifold. The
first two principal components explain only approximately 17.98% of the total
variance, suggesting that the relevant arithmetic information is distributed
across a much higher-dimensional subspace. The significantly higher trustworthiness
of non-linear methods confirms that local neighborhood preservation is essential
for interpreting the model’s internal states.

t-SNE vs. UMAP: The t-SNE projection is qualitatively consistent with
our UMAP results, exhibiting clear digit basins and stratified carry fibers.
This cross-algorithm consistency provides strong evidence that the IRST is an
intrinsic geometric feature of the residual stream. We chose UMAP for the main
text because it marginally outperforms t-SNE in trustworthiness (0.9953 vs
0.9907) and better preserves global continuity, which is critical for
representing trajectories that span multiple digit basins.

## Appendix C Geometric Validation and Causal Steering

The main text already presents a representative trajectory-level case study and
causal steering result for 𝒯3 (Figure 6). In
this appendix, we restore the full trajectory-level interpretation of that
figure before turning to the broader native-space ablations and
intrinsic-dimensionality measurements.

## C.1 Detailed Case Study on 𝒯3 

We first visualize the latent geometry of this trajectory. We calculate the
centroids of the stable clusters for (3,3,0) , (4,4,1) , and (5,5,2) in
the last-layer (p=4 ) representation space.

Figure 6 (Left) presents the projection of all samples
belonging to 𝒯3 . The x-axis represents the cosine distance
relative to the central node centroid (4,4,1) , while the y-axis represents
the analytical Carry Potential Φ . The empirical distribution mirrors the
theoretical schematic in the main text (Figure 3): the
low-potential cluster (3,3,0) , the central cluster (4,4,1) , and the
high-potential cluster (5,5,2) are connected by a clear V-shaped
progression. Crucially, leakage errors like (5,4,2) and hallucination
errors like (4,5,1) reside precisely in the transition zones between the
stable basins. This confirms that these errors are geometric intermediate
states where the representation has drifted away from the cluster center but
has not yet crossed the decision boundary of the next carry fiber.

## C.2 Detailed Causal Steering Dynamics

Using the same steering intervention defined in Section 6,
we can interpret Figure 6 (Right) at the level of individual
thresholds. The four representative samples are ordered exactly as their
geometric positions would suggest:

• 

Stable State (5,5,2) (Φ=2.36 ): This sample is deeply
embedded in the “Carry 2” basin. It requires a significant negative steering
force (α≈−0.5 ) to suppress the carry signal and flip the output
back to 4.

• 

Hallucination Error (4,5,1) (Φ=1.96 ): This sample
represents a “barely” wrong 5. It lies extremely close to the decision
boundary and requires only a minimal push (α≈−0.1 ) to
correct it back to the ground truth 4.

• 

Leakage Error (5,4,2) (Φ=2.00 ): This sample represents
a “barely” wrong 4. It resides just below the threshold and is corrected
to 5 with a positive push of α≈0.3 .

• 

Stable State (4,4,1) (Φ=1.62 ): This sample is stable
in the “Carry 1” basin. It requires a strong positive force (α≈0.5 ) to induce a transition to 5.

The precise ordering of these transition thresholds quantitatively confirms
that the model’s arithmetic decision is strictly determined by the projection
of the representation onto the Carry Potential direction.

## C.3 Native-Space Validation Across Trajectories

Figure 8: Projection-independent validation of the IRSTs in the native
representation space. Cosine distance to anchor states is evaluated directly
in ℝ2560 across multiple trajectories. The characteristic V-shaped
correlation between native-space distance and the continuous carry potential
Φ generalizes across 𝒯0​…​𝒯9 , supporting
the claim that the IRST organization is not solely a 2D projection artifact.
The exceptional behavior near 𝒯8 and 𝒯9 is
consistent with the absence of a continuous adjacent-digit bridge across the
0↔9 boundary.

As an ablation on the projection choice, we also measure the trajectory geometry
directly in the original residual space. Figure 8 shows that
the native-space cosine-distance profiles preserve the same V-shaped correlation
with Φ across 𝒯0​…​𝒯9 . In other words, the
core ordering is already present in ℝ2560 and does not depend on
a particular 2D UMAP layout.

## C.4 Intrinsic-Dimensionality Analysis

Figure 9: Intrinsic dimensionality across IRSTs. We report the participation
ratio, TWO-NN, and Levina–Bickel MLE estimates for 𝒯0​…​𝒯9 
and their pooled union. The trajectory-conditioned subsets remain stably
low-dimensional in native space, while the pooled set exhibits a larger linear
effective dimension.

Figure 9 summarizes intrinsic-dimensionality estimates computed
directly in native space. Across 𝒯0​…​𝒯9 , the
trajectory-conditioned subsets remain consistently low-dimensional, while the
pooled set exhibits a noticeably larger linear effective dimension. This pattern
supports the picture that individual IRSTs occupy relatively compact geometric
subsets embedded within a broader shared arithmetic scaffold.

Figure 10: Layer-wise evolution of intrinsic dimensionality. We compare
the nonlinear and linear intrinsic-dimension estimates for 𝒯5 
and the pooled set of all trajectories across layers. The two remain broadly
similar in early layers, while later layers develop more trajectory-specific
local structure.

As further illustrated in Figure 10, we additionally examined
layer-wise intrinsic-dimension estimates for 𝒯5 and the pooled
set (All). The two are broadly similar before layer 23. Between layers 23–31,
𝒯5 has slightly lower nonlinear ID (MLE) than All, while after
layer 31 this trend reverses. One possible reading is that a relatively stable
global scaffold forms first, followed by later refinement of
trajectory-specific local structure, broadly consistent with Appendix K.

## Appendix D Validation of the Raw Sum Assumption

In the main context, we posit that the model’s arithmetic errors are primarily
driven by latent carry deviations rather than failures in local column-wise
summation. This assumption, mathematically expressed as
r^p≈rp , is foundational to both our theoretical derivation
of latent carry states and the design of the inference-time correction mechanism.

To validate this, we trained an 3-layer MLP classification probe to predict
the absolute raw sum rp=∑iai,p from the final layer activations
𝒉p(L) at p=4 . For our 3-term addition task, rp 
ranges from 0 to 27, constituting a 28-class classification problem. Crucially,
we evaluated this probe on a balanced dataset containing equal numbers of correct
and incorrect model generations.

## Results.

The probe achieved an Accuracy of 89.35% and an AUC of 99.59%
on the validation set, far exceeding the random baseline (Accuracy
∼3.6% ). While this performance is not perfect—implying that a minority
of errors may indeed stem from genuine local calculation failures—the high
fidelity supports two critical conclusions.

On the theoretical front, it indicates that the model predominantly encodes the
correct local sum even when it generates an incorrect output digit s^p .
This suggests that arithmetic errors are largely geometrically constrained: the
representation typically remains anchored to the correct IRST (preserving
rp ) but slides along it into an incorrect carry fiber. Consequently,
mapping output errors to carry deviations (c^p=s^p−rp )
is physically justified as the dominant error mechanism, though not an exclusive
one. On the methodological side, the robustness of the internal raw sum signal
validates the Local Calculation Stream in our dual-stream
intervention method (Section 8), ensuring that extracting r^p serves as a dependable, albeit probabilistic, anchor for reconstruction
in the vast majority of instances.

Figure 11: Geometric signatures of carry-based and non-carry errors.
Error modes are decoupled using the raw-sum probe. Carry-based errors, where
the local raw sum is still recovered correctly, remain concentrated near adjacent
decision boundaries. In contrast, non-carry errors scatter across more distant
regions and do not follow a single continuous trajectory, indicating a distinct
failure mode beyond the dominant carry-deviation mechanism. In the plotted
annotations, 𝒯 denotes the inferred trajectory identity, g​t 
denotes the ground-truth digit, and p denotes the analyzed generation
position (fixed here at p=4 ).

This distinction is visualized directly in Figure 11. The
carry-based subset follows the same boundary-concentrated pattern emphasized in
the main text, whereas the raw-sum-failure subset is geometrically far less structured.

## Appendix E Derivation of Latent Carry States

In this section, we provide the detailed derivation for inferring the latent predicted
input carry c^p from the observed model output s^p . This
inference is grounded in the modular arithmetic properties of the addition
task.

## Problem Setup.

Recall the modular relationship for the ground truth digit sp , derived
from the raw sum rp and the ground truth input carry cp :

sp≡(rp+cp)(mod10). 

(10)

We posit that the model generates its predicted digit s^p using the same
logic but based on its internal states. Assuming the local summation is robust
(i.e., the perceived raw sum matches the true raw sum r^p=rp ), any
deviation in the output must stem from a latent predicted carry c^p :

s^p≡(rp+c^p)(mod10). 

(11)

We analyze the carry implications for the two primary error modes: Underestimation
and Overestimation.

## 1. Underestimation (Leakage).

This error mode occurs when the model outputs a digit that is exactly 1 less
than the ground truth (modulo 10). Mathematically, this is expressed as:

s^p≡(sp−1)(mod10). 

(12)

Substituting the definitions from Equation 10 and Equation 11
into this relation:

(rp+c^p) 
≡(rp+cp−1)(mod10) 

c^p 
≡(cp−1)(mod10). 

(13)

Since carry values in standard addition are small integers (typically cp∈{0,1,2} for 3 terms addition), this equivalence implies c^p=cp−1 . Thus, an output underestimation directly maps to a Leakage of
the internal carry.

## 2. Overestimation (Hallucination).

This error mode occurs when the model outputs a digit that is exactly 1 greater
than the ground truth (modulo 10):

s^p≡(sp+1)(mod10). 

(14)

Substituting the definitions yields:

(rp+c^p) 
≡(rp+cp+1)(mod10) 

c^p 
≡(cp+1)(mod10). 

(15)

This implies c^p=cp+1 . Thus, an output overestimation maps to a
Hallucination of an additional carry unit.

## Appendix F Derivation of the Noisy Quantization Error Rate

We derive the error probability for the Noisy Quantization Model. Let
Φ be the ground truth potential and Φ^=Φ+ϵ be the
noisy estimate with ϵ∼𝒩⁡(0,σ2) . The discrete carry
is c^=⌊Φ^⌋ . We define the fractional part as
δ⁡(Φ)=Φ−⌊Φ⌋ . The standard Q-function is defined
as:

Q(z)=12​π∫z∞e−t2/2dt. 

(16)

## 1. Underestimation (Leakage).

Leakage occurs when the noise pushes the potential below the integer floor, i.e.,
Φ+ϵ<⌊Φ⌋ , which simplifies to
ϵ<−δ⁡(Φ) . Utilizing the symmetry of the Gaussian distribution
(P⁡(Z<−z)=Q⁡(z) ), the probability is:

Pleak​(Φ)=P⁡(ϵσ<−δ⁡(Φ)σ)=Q⁡(δ⁡(Φ)σ). 

(17)

## 2. Overestimation (Hallucination).

Hallucination occurs when the noise pushes the potential above the next integer
ceiling, i.e., Φ+ϵ≥⌊Φ⌋+1 , which implies ϵ≥1−δ⁡(Φ) . The probability is directly given by the Q-function:

Phalluc​(Φ)=P⁡(ϵσ≥1−δ⁡(Φ)σ)=Q⁡(1−δ⁡(Φ)σ). 

(18)

## Total Error Probability.

Assuming negligible probabilities for non-unit errors (valid for small
σ ), the total error rate is the sum of the leakage and hallucination
risks:

P⁡(Error∣Φ)=Q⁡(δ⁡(Φ)σ)+Q⁡(1−δ⁡(Φ)σ). 

(19)

Figure 12: Scaling of cognitive noise with task complexity. We
extend the analysis of Figure 5 to 4-term (n=4 ) and 5-term (n=5 ) addition. The periodic bathtub structure persists across settings,
validating the universality of the quantization mechanism. However, the
fitted noise level σ increases significantly from 0.05 (n=3 ) to
0.12 (n=4 ) and 0.25 (n=5 ), indicating a sharp degradation in signal fidelity
as the operand count grows. 

## Appendix G Scaling Dynamics of Cognitive Noise

We extend our analysis to higher-complexity tasks to investigate how the cognitive
noise σ scales. As shown in Figure 12, the periodic bathtub
error distribution is preserved in both 4-term and 5-term addition, confirming
that the quantization of a continuous carry potential is a universal mechanistic
primitive in LLM arithmetic. Notably, we observe a sharp non-linear growth in σ 
as the number of addends (n ) increases: from σ≈0.05 at n=3 
to σ≈0.25 at n=5 . This increase in noise causes the overlap of
Gaussian tails near the quantization thresholds, effectively eliminating the
robust plateaus where error rates were previously near zero.

Our analysis identifies three primary drivers of this noise. First, the operand
count (n ) increases the informational load on the attention mechanism, diluting
the signal-to-noise ratio during the aggregation of carry potential. Second, longer
digit lengths (m ) incur a cumulative cognitive load, leading to higher
baseline noise. Finally, while the results in the main text aggregate all positions
to demonstrate the general mechanism, a boundary-focused analysis reveals that
the edge positions (p=0 and p=9 ) deviate from the interior periodic regime.
As shown in Figure 13, these boundary columns exhibit distinct
frequency and error profiles, consistent with reduced effective carry ambiguity
at the most significant digit and stricter discrete constraints at the least
significant digit. These findings suggest that the arithmetic capacity of Transformers
is fundamentally bounded by the accumulation of this analog neural noise, a
scaling property we leave for future systematic formulation.

Figure 13: Boundary-position bathtub profiles. Frequency and conditional-error
distributions at the most significant digit (p=0 , top row) and the least
significant digit (p=9 , bottom row) for 3-term 10-digit addition. Unlike
the interior columns summarized in the main text, these boundary positions
show structurally different profiles, highlighting that the steady-state bathtub
regime is primarily an interior-position phenomenon.

## Appendix H Generalize to Other LLMs

To validate the universality of our geometric framework, we extend our
analysis beyond the Qwen3-4B model used in the main text. We visualize the last-layer
representations of two additional models with different scales and architectures:
Qwen3-8B and Gemma-3-4B-IT.

Figure 14: Generalization of the IRST geometry across different
models. (Left) UMAP visualization for Qwen3-8B on a 12-digit
addition task. The manifold structure is highly consistent with the 4B model,
featuring a sequential arrangement of digit basins (0–9) connected by clear
trajectories (e.g., 𝒯0,𝒯1,𝒯2 ).
(Right) UMAP visualization for Gemma-3-4B-IT on a 10-digit
addition task. Despite architectural differences, the fundamental geometry
of IRSTs remains (e.g., 𝒯0∼𝒯3 ). 

## H.1 IRSTs

As shown in Figure 14 (Left), the Qwen3-8B model exhibits a
manifold geometry strikingly similar to its smaller counterpart Qwen3-4B in
Figure 2. The digit anchors are arranged in a distinct, quasi-linear
sequence from 0 to 9. The IRSTs form continuous paths that seamlessly bridge
adjacent digit basins. This indicates that the geometric encoding strategy is stable
across model scales within the same architectural lineage.

The Gemma-3-4B-IT model (Figure 14, Right), representing a different
model family, presents a slightly different global curvature. However, the
core geometric properties predicted by our framework remain intact. We can clearly
identify the basin structure for digits 0–9 and trace specific IRSTs.

This picture is further supported by the top panel of
Figure 16, which visualizes the single-task arithmetic
transformers of Quirke et al. (2025). The under-converged checkpoint
still exhibits continuous inter-basin bridges similar to the IRST geometry in
our main setting, whereas the fully converged checkpoint resolves into more
isolated basins. This suggests that the same continuous organization can arise
as an intermediate representational regime even in specialized arithmetic
models.

These observations suggest that our IRST is not an artifact of a specific
model checkpoint but likely a convergent mechanism for arithmetic
representation in state-of-the-art LLMs. Regardless of the specific architecture,
models appear to learn to organize arithmetic states by “threading” raw-sum
manifolds through semantic digit anchors.

Figure 15: Generalization of the Noisy Quantization hypothesis.
Validation on Qwen3-8B (12-digit addition, top) and Gemma-3-4B-IT (10-digit
addition, bottom). The Left panels show the sample
frequency distribution relative to Carry Potential Φ , indicating that the
dataset covers the entire potential space. The Right panels display
the conditional error rates (red bars) overlaid with our theoretical fit (dashed
blue line). The recurrence of the periodic error pattern near integer
boundaries (green lines) and the high fitting scores (R2≈0.7 )
confirm that the geometric quantization mechanism is robust across different
model sizes and families. 

## H.2 Noisy Quantization Dynamics

We further validate the dynamic mechanism of error generation—the Noisy Quantization
Model—across different model families. Figure 15
visualizes the relationship between the continuous Carry Potential Φ and
the generation accuracy for Qwen3-8B and Gemma-3-4B-IT, while
Figure 16 extends the comparison to specialized arithmetic
transformers trained solely on addition. Together, these results show that
the same quantization-driven error landscape appears both in general-purpose
LLMs and in task-specific arithmetic models before full convergence.

## Recurrence of the Bathtub Curve.

As shown in the right panels of Figure 15, both Qwen-3-8B
and Gemma-3-4B-IT exhibit the characteristic periodic error distribution
observed in the main text. Error rates remain negligible near stable midpoints
(e.g., 0.5,1.5 ) but spike sharply as Φ approaches integer boundaries (1.0,2.0 ). This confirms that arithmetic failures are structurally induced by
signal ambiguity near quantization thresholds rather than random stochasticity.
The bottom panel of Figure 16 shows the same
bathtub-shaped error profile in the under-converged specialized arithmetic
transformer, indicating that geometric slippage is not unique to
general-purpose LLMs.

## Theoretical Fit and Noise Levels.

Fitting our theoretical error function (Equation 6) to the empirical data
yields a robust fit (R2≥0.70 ) for both models. We estimate the
cognitive noise levels to be σ≈0.05 for Qwen-3-8B and
σ≈0.07 for Gemma-3-4B-IT. Notably, Qwen-3-8B is evaluated on a
more challenging 12-digit addition task compared to the 10-digit task used for
the 4B models. The fact that Qwen-3-8B maintains a similarly low noise level (σ≈0.05 ) despite the increased sequence length indicates superior arithmetic
precision, as the smaller model would likely exhibit significantly higher
noise if subjected to this harder regime. In the same spirit, the specialized
arithmetic transformers in Figure 16 provide a qualitative
training-time contrast: the under-converged checkpoint still exhibits the
bathtub-shaped failure profile, whereas the fully converged checkpoint shows
more isolated basins in representation space, suggesting that full convergence
sharpens the quantization geometry and suppresses boundary ambiguity.
Ultimately, the universal emergence
of the bathtub curve suggests that the Noisy Quantization Model is a fundamental
phenomenological account of arithmetic processing in LLMs.

Figure 16: Additional evidence from specialized arithmetic transformers.
(Top) UMAP projections from the under-converged and fully converged
single-task addition models reported by Quirke et al. (2025). The
under-converged model exhibits continuous inter-basin geometry similar to our
main setting, while the fully converged model forms more isolated basins.
(Bottom) Conditional error-rate curves for the under-converged model
still follow the periodic bathtub pattern predicted by the Noisy Quantization
Model.

Figure 17: IRST analysis for 4-term addition (cp∈{0,1,2,3} ).
(Left) 2D UMAP projection of activations at p=4 . While the digit
backbone (0-9) persists, the increased density of carry fibers causes visual
entanglement of trajectories in 2D space. However 3D plots can resolve these
overlaps. (Right) Schematic of the expanded geometry. Between any adjacent
digit basins (e.g., 0 and 1), there are now three distinct transition paths
(red lines) corresponding to different raw sums, representing the increased risk
of carry confusion. 

## Appendix I Generalize to 4-Term Addition

In the main text, we focused on 3-term addition where the input carry cp 
is limited to {0,1,2} . To demonstrate the universality of the IRST framework,
we extend our analysis to the addition of four 10-digit integers. In this setting,
the maximum possible carry is 3, meaning the internal state must encode four distinct
carry fibers cp∈{0,1,2,3} within each digit basin.

## I.1 Visualizing Higher-Dimensional Manifolds

Figure 17 (Left) presents the UMAP projection of the final
layer activations (p=4 ) for the 4-term task. While the macroscopic backbone which
is defined by the sequence of digit anchors 0→9 remains intact, the
microscopic texture becomes significantly denser compared to the 3-term case.

We observe that distinct IRSTs (e.g., 𝒯0,𝒯1,𝒯3 ) still manifest as continuous paths connecting correct and incorrect
states across digit boundaries. However, the 2D projection exhibits noticeable
entanglement, where different trajectories appear to cross or overlap. We
attribute this to projection artifacts. The arithmetic manifold for 4-term addition
possesses a higher intrinsic dimensionality required to orthogonally separate four
carry states. When compressed into 2D, these dimensions collapse, creating
visual occlusions.

However, these apparent overlaps disappear in a 3D UMAP projection,
confirming that the fibers
remain geometrically distinct in the high-dimensional representation space.

## I.2 Geometry of Error Scenarios

The schematic in Figure 17 (Right) illustrates the logical
structure of this expanded manifold. The expansion of the carry range from {0,1,2} to {0,1,2,3} increases the number of bridges connecting adjacent
digit basins.

For any two adjacent digit anchors k and k+1 , there are now three distinct
IRSTs that traverse the boundary, corresponding to three potential error scenarios:

1. 

Low Carry Confusion (0↔1 ): Occurs on
trajectory 𝒯k . The model confuses state (k,c=0) with (k+1,c=1) .

2. 

Mid Carry Confusion (1↔2 ): Occurs on
trajectory 𝒯k−1 . The model confuses state (k,c=1) with (k+1,c=2) .

3. 

High Carry Confusion (2↔3 ): Occurs on
trajectory 𝒯k−2 . The model confuses state (k,c=2) with (k+1,c=3) .

This confirms that the Noisy Quantization Model scales with task complexity.
As the number of operands increases, the robust plateau between quantization thresholds
shrinks (packing more fibers into the same activation norm), statistically
increasing the probability of geometric slippage (see Figure 12).

Algorithm 1 Inference-Time Correction via Dual-Stream Consistency

 1:

  Input: Activation 𝒉p(L) ,
Current Prediction s^p , Raw Sum Probe fθr , Potential
Probe fθϕ , Tolerance δ 

 2:

  Output: Final
Token sf​i​n​a​l 

 3:

  {1. Dual-Stream Decoding} 

 4:

  r^p←fθr​(𝒉p(L)) {Decode Local Calculation Stream}

 5:

  Φ^p←fθϕ​(𝒉p(L)) 
{Decode Global Context Stream}

 6:

  {2. Construct Plausible Carry Set} 

 7:

  𝒦p​(δ)←{⌊ϕ⌋∣ϕ∈[Φ^p−δ,Φ^p+δ]} {δ -neighborhood of potential}

 8:

  {3. Consistency Verification} 

 9:

  i​s​_​c​o​n​s​i​s​t​e​n​t←False 

 10:

  if ∃c∈𝒦p​(δ)​ s.t. ​s^p≡(r^p+c)(mod10) then

 11:

   i​s​_​c​o​n​s​i​s​t​e​n​t←True 

 12:

  end if

 13:

  {4. Intervention Decision} 

 14:

  if i​s​_​c​o​n​s​i​s​t​e​n​t then

 15:

   sf​i​n​a​l←s^p {Preserve original output}

 16:

  else

 17:

   sf​i​n​a​l←(r^p+⌊Φ^p⌋)(mod10) {Intervene} 

 18:

  end if

 19:

  return sf​i​n​a​l 

## Appendix J Details for Inference-Time Correction Method

## J.1 Experiment Settings

We utilize Qwen3-4B, Qwen3-8B and Gemma-3-4B-IT to conduct the experiments. The
dataset consists of 10,000 addition problems involving 3 numbers, where each
number is a positive integer with exactly 10 digits. We split the dataset into
training, validation, and test sets with a ratio of 0.8:0.1:0.1 . To
quantitatively evaluate the efficacy of our method, the main text focuses on three
primary metrics: Token Accuracy (Token Acc); True Positive
Correction (TP), which measures the proportion of originally incorrect tokens
successfully rectified by the method; and False Positive Preservation
(FP), which measures the proportion of originally correct tokens that remain unchanged
(following (Sun et al., 2025)). The complete implementation details of our proposed
inference-time correction protocol are summarized in Algorithm 1.
Unless otherwise noted, all probes described below are trained on the hidden states
extracted from the final layer combing all positions. All experiments were
conducted on a single NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 GPU. Our experiments were implemented
using PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019) and HuggingFace Transformers (Wolf et al., 2020).
All models were run with bfloat16 precision for efficient memory usage.

## Dual-Stream Probe

The raw sum probe fθr is a classification MLP trained to minimize
Cross-Entropy loss against the ground truth rp(mod10) . The architecture
consists of an input layer, two hidden layers of 512 and 128 dimensions
respectively, and an output layer projecting to 10 classes. The carry
potential probe fθϕ is a regression MLP with a similar
architecture but with a scalar output. It is trained via MSE loss to estimate the
continuous potential Φp . Both probes are optimized using the Adam
optimizer with a learning rate of 10−3 and early stopping based on
validation accuracy (for fθr ) or validation MSE (for fθϕ ).

## Replacement

This method utilizes an MLP (same architecture as fθr ) to predict the
ground truth digit and directly replaces the model’s generation with the MLP’s
prediction during inference.

## Re-prompting (Sun et al., 2025)

This method utilizes the probe as an error detector to trigger a natural
language correction mechanism. The architecture of the probe is identical to that
in the Replacement method. If the model’s generated token matches the probe’s
prediction, it is appended to {current_output}. If not, we append
a specific correction suffix to the context: ”That step looks incorrect.
Let’s re-do just this step: {expression} = {current_output}”. The model is
then forced to regenerate the current digit based on this augmented context.
Our evaluation reveals performance degradation compared to the baseline. We attribute
this to KV-cache representation locking, where erroneous vector states persist
and bias attention despite lexical corrections, and to asymmetric decision boundaries,
which render high-confidence errors resistant to weak intervention signals
while introducing new noise during regeneration.

## Steering

Steering guided by probe (von Rütte et al., 2024; Taufeeque et al., 2024; Cheng et al., 2024; Bhalla et al., 2024)
is an emerging alternative technique. In this method, we first train a linear
classification probe P . For a given hidden state 𝒉p(L) ,
the probe predicts a target class
c^=arg⁡max⁡(W​𝒉p(L)) , where W is the weight matrix
of P . The steering vector 𝒗 is defined as the row in W 
corresponding to class c^ (Mallen et al., 2024; Li et al., 2023).
The activation is then modified as
𝒉′p(L)=𝒉p(L)+λ⋅𝒗 . The steering strength λ is selected via grid search over {0.0,0.25,0.5,0.75,1.0} to maximize sample-level accuracy on the validation set.

Figure 18: Impact of Tolerance δ . Token accuracy (left axis, blue)
and Question accuracy (right axis, orange) under different values of δ .
The peak at δ≈0.12 validates the existence of a noise margin
in the model’s carry potential estimation.

## J.2 Further Research on Tolerance

The set of plausible carries 𝒦p​(δ) effectively defines a
confidence interval in the carry space:

𝒦p​(δ)={⌊ϕ⌋∣ϕ∈[Φ^p−δ,Φ^p+δ]}, 

(20)

where δ is a hyperparameter representing tolerance.

To investigate the influence of δ on both token and question accuracies,
we conducted inference-time correction experiments by varying δ from 0
to 0.2 in increments of 0.01. We evaluated performance using two metrics:
Token Accuracy, which measures the proportion of individual digits
correctly generated across all positions, and Question Accuracy, a stricter
metric that counts a prediction as correct only if the entire generated number
string perfectly matches the ground truth.

As illustrated in Figure 18, both token and question accuracies
exhibit a non-monotonic trend, initially ascending before subsequently declining.
The metrics peak simultaneously at δ=0.12 , achieving a token accuracy of
0.8973 and a question accuracy of 0.3300, while the minimum performance is
recorded at δ=0 (Token Acc: 0.8727, Ques Acc: 0.2320). Notably, the pronounced
fluctuation observed in question accuracy aligns with the Noisy
Quantization Model: strictly enforcing consistency (δ=0 ) introduces false
corrections near quantization boundaries, whereas a moderate tolerance (δ≈0.1 ) effectively filters out this noise while correcting genuine
geometric slippages.

The set of plausible carries 𝒦p​(δ) therefore functions as
a narrow confidence interval in carry space, allowing the method to preserve
ambiguous but still plausible internal states rather than forcing an unnecessarily
sharp quantization decision.

Table 5: Error-type analysis of the Dual-Stream Consistency method
on Qwen3-4B for 10-digit addition at position p=4 .

Error Type
Fixed
Unfixed
Total

Off-by-One (±1 )
96
561
657

Other Errors
12
36
48

Total
108
597
705

As shown in Table 5, the vast majority (93.19%) of the
errors originally produced by the model are off-by-one errors. Among the errors
successfully corrected by our method, the majority (88.9%) are also off-by-one
cases, confirming that the dual-stream intervention primarily targets the boundary-crossing
failure mode emphasized throughout the paper.

Table 6: Performance comparison on Qwen3-4b, Gemma-3-4b-it and Qwen3-8b using
various inference-time correction methods.

Method
Token Acc
Ques Acc
Modified Rate
TP Correction
FP Preservation

Model: Qwen3-4B  Task: 10-digit addition (3 terms)

Original
0.8626
0.2810
/
/
/

Steering
0.8827
0.2820
0.0775
0.3058
0.9697

Replacement
0.8913
0.3000
0.0710
0.3173
0.9765

Re-Prompting
0.7990
0.2610
0.1040
0.0008
0.9998

Dual-Stream Probe (δ=0 )
0.8727
0.2320
0.1240
0.4439
0.9407

Dual-Stream Probe (δ=0.05 )
0.8887
0.2900
0.0844
0.3551
0.9675

Dual-Stream Probe (δ=0.1 )
0.8956
0.3240
0.0646
0.3046
0.9813

Model: Gemma-3-4B-IT  Task: 10-digit addition (3 terms)

Original
0.7286
0.3170
/
/
/

Steering
0.8210
0.3010
0.1417
0.3319
0.9531

Replacement
0.8499
0.3780
0.1085
0.3405
0.9732

Re-Prompting
0.7141
0.3210
0.1065
0.1757
0.9133

Dual-Stream Probe (δ=0 )
0.8586
0.3470
0.1297
0.4046
0.9643

Dual-Stream Probe (δ=0.05 )
0.8598
0.3730
0.0967
0.3264
0.9837

Dual-Stream Probe (δ=0.1 )
0.8492
0.3580
0.0841
0.2726
0.9897

Model: Qwen3-8B  Task: 12-digit addition (3 terms)

Original
0.9329
0.5630
/
/
/

Steering
0.9470
0.5770
0.0784
0.3108
0.9688

Replacement
0.9547
0.6440
0.0391
0.4222
0.9891

Re-Prompting
0.8806
0.5360
0.0738
0.0843
0.9379

Dual-Stream Probe (δ=0 )
0.9187
0.4390
0.0782
0.4439
0.9688

Dual-Stream Probe (δ=0.05 )
0.9378
0.5350
0.0425
0.3315
0.9838

Dual-Stream Probe (δ=0.1 )
0.9462
0.5710
0.0266
0.2638
0.9933

## J.3 Generalization Analysis

To assess the robustness of our approach across different architectures and task
complexities, we extend our evaluation to Gemma-3-4B-IT (10-digit addition)
and Qwen3-8B (12-digit addition), as detailed in Table 6.

In this broader analysis, we introduce two additional metrics to provide a
holistic view of performance: Question Accuracy (Ques Acc) as
explained above, and Modified Rate, which quantifies the frequency with
which the inference-time method alters the original model output.

As shown in Table 6, the Dual-Stream Probe maintains
competitive performance. We note that in some cases (particularly Qwen3-8B),
the Dual-Stream Probe yields slightly lower accuracy metrics compared to the
strict Replacement method. Crucially, these results serve as a causal
validation of the IRST geometry rather than a mere performance boost. The ability
to correct errors using only internal consistency (Dual-Stream) implies that the
model retains correct latent information even when the output quantization fails.
The Replacement method, while effective, relies on the probe’s external
supervision; the Dual-Stream method relies on the model’s own internal coherence.

## Appendix K Layer-Wise Analysis of Internal Activations

## K.1 Probe Analysis

To understand where and how the arithmetic logic emerges within the model , we
conducted a comprehensive layer-wise probing analysis using Qwen3-4B. We use the
same dataset and dataset split ratio as in Appendix J. We trained
separate MLP probes on the hidden states of each layer (0–36) on all positions
to predict six target variables which are consistent with the main text. The specific
definitions of these targets are as follows:

Correctness A binary label indicating whether the model’s generated
digit successfully matches the ground truth.

Carry Potential A continuous regression target Φp , described
in Section 5.1.For evaluation and testing, the floor function
is applied to interpret this continuous prediction as a discrete integer carry
value.

Ground Truth The mathematically correct digit expected at the current
position (integer label 0–9).

Input Carry The actual integer carry value transmitted from the previous
column (integer label 0-2 in our specific task).

Model Output The specific digit token actually generated by the model
(integer label 0–9).

Raw Sum The local sum of the operand digits in the current column modulo
10, excluding any incoming carry (integer label 0–9).

From the results in Figure 19, across all arithmetic-related
variables (Raw Sum, Ground Truth, Model Output), we observe a distinct step-function
behavior. The information regarding the specific digit values remains nearly imperceptible
(accuracy close to random guessing) throughout the early and middle layers. A
sudden informational surge occurs at Layer 24. The regression error for the
continuous carry potential remains high in early layers but drops at Layer 24,
coinciding with the emergence of the Raw Sum. The input carry information
shows a more volatile trajectory in intermediate layers before stabilizing and
peaking alongside the other metrics. This synchronization supports our Dual-Stream
hypothesis: the model appears to disentangle and resolve both the local
arithmetic facts (Raw Sum) and the global context (Carry) simultaneously to
synthesize the final output.

(a) Ground Truth Probe

(b) Correctness Probe

(c) Input Carry Probe

(d) Model Output Probe

(e) Raw Sum Probe

(f) Carry Potential Probe

Figure 19: Layer-wise performance of different probes trained on Qwen3-4B
combing all positions.

Figure 20: Layer-wise input-carry decoding accuracy for attention and
FFN outputs. Attention blocks exhibit sharper stepwise gains, while FFN outputs
largely follow these updates, suggesting that carry information is consolidated
through a staged pipeline across layers.

To partially localize where the carry signal is written, we separately probe the
outputs of the attention and FFN blocks. As shown in Figure 20,
the attention modules exhibit the sharpest stepwise gains, whereas the FFN
outputs mostly lag behind and mirror these updates. This pattern suggests that
carry information is first consolidated by attention and then propagated through
a staged feed-forward refinement process.

## K.2 UMAP Visualization

To further interpret the dynamic evolution of representations, we employ UMAP
to perform dimensionality reduction on the hidden states of intermediate
layers. Using the same Qwen3-4B model and the dataset described in Appendix J,
we apply Aligned UMAP across all layers. Unlike standard UMAP, this technique
enforces temporal consistency by regularizing the projection of each layer based
on the geometry of the preceding layer. The results are visualized in Figure
21, and the complete evolutionary dynamics are provided as
GIF files in the supplementary materials.

The results reveal that from Layers 1 to 23 (Figure 21(a)-21(e)),
samples exhibit a persistent 10×10 hierarchical clustering structure,
with ten macro-clusters representing the previously generated digit (Position 3),
each contain ten micro-clusters. This structured organization remains stable
throughout the early layers, with only minor shifts and local expansions or contractions.
The precise mechanism of micro-clusters remains to be fully elucidated; we hypothesize
they may represent the residual encoding of previously generated digits (e.g.,
the value at Position 2) or latent carry signals.

Consistent with the sudden informational surge observed in our probing experiments,
a dramatic mutation occurs at Layer 24 (Figure 21(f)), where
the hierarchical clusters collapse into an elliptical manifold. In the late
layers (Figure 21(g)-21(i)), this manifold
gradually dissociates into distinct IRST curves. This transition marks the
point where the model resolves the latent variables in explicit arithmetic
logic.

Notably, the IRSTs in Figure 21(i) appear disjoint,
contrasting with the continuous manifold in Figure 2. This fragmentation
is an artifact of Aligned UMAP: by penalizing large displacements to ensure
temporal continuity, the distinct clustering of early layers acts as a geometric
anchor that visually tears the emerging manifold. Thus, while Figure 2
depicts the intrinsic geometry, Figure 21(i) captures the
path-dependent evolution.

(a) Layer 3

(b) Layer 6

(c) Layer 9

(d) Layer 15

(e) Layer 23

(f) Layer 24

(g) Layer 30

(h) Layer 33

(i) Layer 36

Figure 21: Layer-wise Alighed UMAP visualization.

## Appendix L Probe vs. Logit Lens: Evidence of Latent Arithmetic States

To further validate that the geometric structures (IRSTs) captured by our
probes represent intrinsic internal computations rather than trivial output
reflections, we compared the performance of our Linear Probes against the Logit
Lens technique (nostalgebraist, 2020).

The Logit Lens applies the final layer’s unembedding matrix WU to intermediate
hidden states 𝒉p(l) to project them directly into the vocabulary
space. We evaluated both methods on identifying the Ground Truth Digit (GT)
and the Model’s Final Output Digit (Pred) across all 36 layers. The results for
3-term and 4-term addition are shown in Figure 22.

Figure 22: Layer-wise Performance Comparison: Linear Probes vs. Logit
Lens. The Green and Red lines represent the accuracy of linear probes trained
on 𝒉p(l) for the Ground Truth (GT) and Model Prediction
(Pred), respectively. The Blue and Orange lines represent the accuracy of the
Logit Lens (applying the unembedding matrix directly). Key
Observation: There is a significant decoding lag. Probes successfully
decode the arithmetic state (Accuracy>80% ) starting around Layer 24,
whereas the Logit Lens fails to extract meaningful information until Layer
30 (the “readout phase”). This gap indicates that the arithmetic computation
occurs in a latent geometric subspace (the IRST) that is linearly separable but
not yet aligned with the output vocabulary.

## L.1 Analysis of the Decoding Gap

The comparison reveals three distinct phases of processing:

1. 

Preparation Phase (Layers 0–23): Both probes and Logit Lens
show near-random accuracy (<10% ), suggesting that the specific digit information
for the current position is not yet fully localized or linearly decodable.

2. 

Latent Computation Phase (Layers 24–29): This is the
critical window where our geometric analysis focuses. Linear probes achieve
high accuracy (>90% ), indicating that the model has internally resolved
the arithmetic state (Raw Sum and Carry). However, the Logit Lens accuracy
remains low. This discrepancy proves that the internal representation at this
stage is orthogonal or unaligned with the static word embedding
space. The IRST structure exists here as an abstract mathematical
representation, decoupled from the specific token IDs.

3. 

Readout Phase (Layers 30–36): The Logit Lens accuracy
sharply rises to match the probes, indicating that the internal state is finally
rotated into the vocabulary space for token generation.

This comparison strongly justifies the necessity of training probes (and
analyzing the resulting geometry) rather than relying on the Logit Lens. The
Logit Lens would miss the crucial “Latent Computation Phase” where the core
arithmetic logic—and the geometric slippages we describe—actually unfold.